---
layout: post
title:  "Multisite Subdomain WordPress in Virtual Box"
date:   2015-04-06
categories: "Linux"
---

In this tutorial we will create a multisite subdomain WordPress intallation in a Virtual Box. 
With this setup you can develop and debug your multiple WordPress sites locally even without Internet connection.

As you probably know WordPress does not allow you to create a network installation if you are on a localhost or use an IP address to access your site. 
If you are running Linux on your host and guest machines you can easily overcome this limitation. Keep reading.

## System

I run a LEMP stack (Linux + Nginx + Mysql + PHP) in the Oracle VM virtual box. 
The guest OS is 64 bit Ubuntu LTS 14.04 minimal. 
My host is also running 64 bit Ubuntu 14.04 LTS full version. 
I set up a ‘Host Only’ network in the virtual box so that I can continue working on my sites when I’m not connected to a network.

## Preparation

I assume that you already have a single site-installation of WordPress running in the virtual box.

If you are starting from scratch, there are excellent tutorials on how to set up a [LEMP stack](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-install-linux-nginx-mysql-php-lemp-stack-on-ubuntu-14-04)
 and [WordPress](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-install-wordpress-with-nginx-on-ubuntu-14-04) on the Digital Ocean web site.

Instructions on how to use VirtualBox on Ubuntu are available [here](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/VirtualBox).

## Set up Host Only network

In the Oracle VM go to **File** in the main menu, then **Preferences >> Network >> Host-only network**. 
Create a new adaptor and configure it manually using the parameters shown below.

## Configuration parameters for host only network

Open your Oracle VM and select ‘Host Only’ network interface for the appliance running your WordPress server. 
Do not forget to disable other network interfaces.

## Configure DHCP service for your new network. 
You can use a configuration different from the default, of cause. Here we will assume that DNCP is configured to
assign IP addresses starting from 172.16.0.101.
Check that the network is working. Type the WordPress server address in your browser, for example `http://172.16.0.101`. 
You should see your home page.

## Change host name on the WordPress server

We need to trick WordPress into believing we are running a real server by creating an alias to localhost. 
The host name is stored in `/etc/hosts`.

Switch to your WordPress server terminal or use ssh from your host. 
Open the file in your favourite editor with superuser privileges, for example:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/hosts
```

Change the name of the local host to your development site address. 
It can be the same as your production site, but it is a good idea to use a different name
so that you don’t mess it up accidentally. So, change

```bash
127.0.0.1 localhost
```

to

```bash
127.0.0.1 awesome.dev
```

Change your site address in the WordPress. Log into wp-admin and change

```bash    
localhost
```

to

```bash
awesome.dev
```

Log out for the changes to take effect.

## Add new domain to /etc/hosts/ on the host machine

Now we need to tell our host how to resolve awesome.dev by adding the virtual box IP to `/etc/hosts`

Switch from the virtual box to the host machine. Open `/etc/hosts` with nano:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/hosts
```

and add the following line:

```bash
172.16.0.101 awesome.net
```

after the line starting with

```bash    
127.0.1.1
```

Check that that you can access the WordPress server from your browser through http://awesome.dev. If something went wrong on that stage, you’ll have to manually reset the site URL (more instructions)

## Update Nginx configuration file

Nginx configuration is normally stored in `/etc/nginx/sites-available/` with a symbolic link placed in `/etc/nginx/sites-enabled`. 
Suppose the configuration file is called `my-awesome-site`.

Open it:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/my-awesome-site
```

find the line

```bash
server_name awesome.dev
```

and add a wildcard for subdomains:

```bash
server_name awesome.dev *.awesome.dev;
```

Save and close.
Reload Nginx:

```bash
sudo service nginx reload
```

Check that subdomain names are being resolved by Nginx. Try accessing a subdomain from your browser, for example:

```bash
oops.awesome.dev
```

You should be redirected to the main page of your site.

## Setup WordPress network

Now proceed with a usual WordPress network installation:

Enable Multisite by adding:

```php
define('WP_ALLOW_MULTISITE', true);
```

to your `wp-config.php` before the lines:

```php
/* That's all, stop editing! Happy blogging. */
```

Log in to wp-admin, go to **Settings >> Setup Network** and enable subdomain network.
Copy the code generated by WordPress and paste it into the `wp-config.php` after the line you’ve just added.
Ignore .htaccess rewrite rules (Nginx does not require any of them).

## Create a site in your new network

Log into wp-admin, go to **My Sites >> Network Admin >> Sites** and create a new site. We’ll call it `truly`. 
You can create a test static page if you wish to.

## Update /etc/hosts on your host machine

Now we need to tell our host machine (the one running the Oracle VM) that we have a new subdomain in our WordPress network.

Switch to the terminal of your host machine. Open `/etc/hosts` once again

```bash
sudo nano /etc/hosts
```

and add the following line:

```bash
172.16.0.101 truly.awesome.dev
```

Check that it works by accessing `http://truly.awesome.dev` from your browser.

## Add more sites

Repeat the last two steps to add more sites to your network.
